Twenty-five of SA’s 257 municipalities received a disclaimer audit opinion, Auditor-General (AG) Tsakani Maluleke said at a media briefing on Wednesday, 15 June.  Makana Municipality is one of the 25, receiving its disclaimer for the third year running.    A disclaimer is the worst result a municipality can receive from the AG, indicating that its financial statements have no value. “If you are unable to do the very basic thing of showing what you have done with public funds, it demonstrates that you have no commitment to living up to your moral obligation to serve as a steward,” Maluleke said. “It shows that you have absolutely no will to drive transparency and no interest in demonstrating accountability,” When a municipality receives a disclaimed opinion, its finances are so poorly managed that it cannot provide documentary evidence to support its financial statements. This means the Auditor-General cannot form an opinion on those statements. When a municipality receives an adverse opinion, it does not follow the correct rules and procedures and does not provide complete, accurate information to account for its spending.  The AG said poor or non-existent record-keeping was again bedevilling many municipalities, who often employed expensive consultants to try to make sense of their financials.  Makana spent almost R1 million on consultants for “asset and expenditure management”. The reason cited for the hire of the consultants was “lack of skills”.  The AG said consultants were often employed to do the “very basics,” such as VAT and tax returns, even though the municipalities have staff. The Chris Hani municipality in the Eastern Cape, for example, paid a consultant R34 million for VAT submissions.  Makana’s newly-appointed Chief Financial Officer (CFO) Nomfundo Fetcha worked as CFO for the Chris Hani Municipality when it received a disclaimer report from the AG in 2019-20.  Here is some more detail from Makana’s damning audit opinions taken from the 2020-21 Auditor-General’s report released on 15 June 2022: The vacancy rate in the finance unit: 17% Consultants used for financial report: YesConsultant costs: R975 152Consultant services used for: Asset management, expenditure management legislationReasons for using consultants: Lack of skillsReasons why consultants were ineffective: Lack of records and documents The Auditor-General raised findings in the following areas: The Auditor-General raised findings in the following areas: Repairs and maintenance expenditure on infrastructure assets: R0 Repairs and maintenance expenditure on infrastructure assets as a percentage of infrastructure assets: 0% Internal control assessment: Intervention required Proper record-keeping: Intervention required Daily and monthly controls: Intervention required In-year and year-end reporting: Intervention required Review and monitor compliance: Intervention required Key officials lack appropriate competencies Overall municipal vacancies: 44%