All roads lead to The Black Power Station as township hero Xolile Madinda, also known as ‘X’, hosts two bands for the National Arts Festival. Born and raised in Makhanda, Madinda established the Black Power Station after witnessing a lack of township participation in the Fest. He wanted to enable people from the township and town to unify through art.  “The unsaid slogan [of the venue]is ‘The International Destination’,” he said enthusiastically. People of all races, genders, ages and nationalities are encouraged to converge on the space. Bringing crowds from the ‘Fingo Festival’, historically located in the township, Madinda believes that the Black Power Station is the best place to get together Makhanda’s township and town life.  From live bands to planting seeds, reading books, and delighting yourself with some braai meat and umqombothi, The Black Power Station is a great place to experience Makhanda’s full potential. Some additional measures will be implemented to make the venue as accessible as possible and direct and attract crowds. Lights and signs will be placed along the road en route to the Black Power Station. Transportation will also be available and can be arranged with Madinda.  ‘X’ is looking forward to the influx of new people and the old faces. “This, for me, is honestly the scariest time,” he said. Covid-19 has brought a change to the fest, and he hopes that numbers are not negatively impacted. But with the assistance of the National Arts Festival, his friends, and the people from his township, Malinda believes it will succeed.  The theme for this year’s shows is ‘Nature, Art and Spirituality’, with an entry fee of R60. Thursday afternoon, from noon to 2 pm, The Black Power Station will host an extraordinary women’s-only event titled Intyatyambo Elityeni. All the artists and spectators in this event will be strictly women. They will then commemorate the late Mam Miriam Makeba in the ‘Miriam Makeba lecture’.  Get in touch with ‘X’ to lend a helping hand or get info about the shows, and come down to the Black Power Station to support one of Makhanda’s most exciting creative venues.  Facebook: The Black Power Station