As the editors of Grocott’s Mail, Rod Amner and I have written in the past calling for ward councillors to tell us if they are in conversation with their constituents, whether that is on social media such as WhatsApp or Facebook, or offline in regular ward community meetings, or elsewhere.  We have also asked Makhandan citizens to tell us if their councillors are in conversations with them. We received some responses from the usual suspects and groups that we, as the editors of Grocott’s, are already a part of.  I was quite frustrated with the lack of response from some councillors and decided that we would go to them. This week I sent out a text on Tuesday 8 March to all 14 ward councillors, writing the following:  I received responses from councillors for the following wards: one, two, four, eight, and fourteen. Two of those ward councillors shared with me where they were having conversations and which groups I could join. I was already in their groups.  The other three either said they would get back to me, share information as it became available, or simply wrote “Good morning, noted.” The other nine councillors? They blue ticked us. So, I decided to follow up with them on Thursday 10 March with another request, it read: In response to this, the independent councillor from Ward 14 contacted us and invited us to join their WhatsApp group. Currently, Grocott’s Mail is present in three WhatsApp groups and can witness and participate in community conversations. Those WhatsApp groups belong to wards four, eight, and fourteen – the only wards not controlled by the ANC.  Grocott’s Mail would like to provide coverage on all the wards and councillors, as we said at the start of the local elections. We have been unable to do this because some councillors are not using local media to share what is happening in their wards. This is fine – not ideal, but fine.  What we do care about at Grocott’s Mail is whether the councillors are in conversation with their communities, if they are being responsive, and if they are held accountable. By joining the WhatsApp groups or offline meetings, we at Grocott’s Mail can report to our larger community, who is stepping up and listening to the needs of our community.  When this editorial was written, only one other councillor had responded with an accidental video call.  If you would like to call upon your ward councillors to request that they add you to community groups or invite you to community meetings, here are their contact details:  If our councillors don’t start conversations, we must call them into conversation with us.