By ROD AMNER Makana Municipality missed a 31 December Eskom payment deadline, in breach of the Grahamstown Business Forum (GBF) & Others vs Makana Court Order of June 2019. Eskom spokesperson Athi Titus said the Municipality had responded to a breach letter and had promised to make arrangements to pay. However, Grahamstown Business Forum (GBF) chair Richard Gaybba, emphasised that since the Makana Municipality is in contempt of court, the GBF and other applicants should have been informed. Gaybba said he was concerned that a cancellation of the payment agreement could have serious consequences for residents and businesses. “We will need to warn them and hope that they pay December and January’s bill by the 8th February 2022. Makana has put the entire city at risk and is in contravention of the court order. The GBF, Makana Residents Association (MRA) and others have spent lots of time and money ‘securing’ the city’s electricity supply,” He said. According to the final 2016-2021 Service Delivery Report released by former Executive Mayor Mzukisi Mpahlwa last year, the Eskom debt had been reduced from R85-million in June 2018 to R15-million in August 2021. Makana owed a total of R101.2-million to creditors on 31 August 2021, according to Mpahlwa’s report. Mpahlwa said the Municipality had resolved to settle all creditors by 30 June 2022 “except Dept of Water and San, which will be settled by 30 June 2024”. An extract from the final ‘service delivery report’ published by former Executive Mayor Mzukisi Mpahlwa last year. Chair of the MRA, Sally Price-Smith, pointed out that a successful civil society court action had been responsible for forcing the Makana Municipality to make regular payments and reduce the Eskom debt. “The direct threat to officials of jail for possible contempt of court has clearly been a motivating factor,” Price-Smith said. Apart from removing the risk of Eskom cutting power to the town altogether, Price-Smith said the power utility had excluded the James Kleynhans Water Treatment Works from the load shedding schedule, enabling the one-day-on, one-day-off water supply to be sustained. “Court action should not be necessary to force the paid administrators to do what they are renumerated well to do on our behalf. “The elected officials should also be reminded that it is their responsibility to carry out oversight, and this kind of debt should never have accumulated when customers were paying for the electricity they received (plus 10%),” Price-Smith added. The 2019 court order obliged Makana to commit to a three-year debt repayment plan servicing old and current debt. The municipality made those payments until December 2021, when it defaulted on a R7.5-million payment. See the original 2019 court order below: