This open letter to the ministers of basic education, health, and co-operative & traditional affairs is co-written by Equal Education, the Equal Education Law Centre, the Learning Trust, Legal Resources Centre, the National Association of Social Change Entities in Education and academics. Dear ministers Angie Motshekga, Joe Phaahla and Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, As schools reopen for 2022, we write to you as a collective of concerned civil society organisations. Over the past two years, learners have been harmed by the amount of time they have been forced to spend at home instead of in the classroom. This continued time away from school has hurt their access to school meals and psychosocial support and increased dropout rates. This has particularly affected those in under-resourced public schools (mainly quintile 1-3) that are unable to adhere to the guidelines in response to the Covid pandemic through no fault of their own. This is because of the dire state of infrastructure in many schools, overcrowding and lack of water and toilets. Each additional day of lost learning has a lasting and lifelong impact on the interests of children and their right to quality basic education. We urge you not to allow this state of affairs to continue into a third year. During a school readiness briefing, we were greatly disappointed by minister Motshekga’s announcement that learners would continue with rotational school attendance. The hope had been that schools would return to full-time attendance in 2022. Schools reopened in June 2020 after more than two months of hard lockdown across SA. Rotational timetabling was introduced to ensure that learners and teachers were safe in schools and allowed for social distancing. This meant that learners attended school on alternative days or weeks.  Rotational attendance was meant to be a temporary intervention aimed at bringing learners back into the classroom while minimising the risk posed by the virus. However, it has remained the norm for the past 18 months, despite new medical evidence around transmission and the availability of vaccines for teachers, parents and older children. We have already seen that the continued use of rotational timetabling will have severe consequences for the quality of education. In a presentation to parliament in June last year, the department of basic education (DBE) said that 75% of learning time in 2020 was lost. The National Income Dynamics Study – Coronavirus Rapid Mobile Survey (Nids-Cram) Wave 5 found that learners across the country lost 705-100% of schooling between March 2020 and June 2021. In May last year, the DBE announced the full return to daily attendance and traditional timetables for all primary school learning (grades R to 7) and schools for learners with special education needs (grades R to 12) from August 2. All schools unable to return to traditional timetabling were required to inform the head of the provincial education department that they would continue with rotational attendance. Provincial MECs are now required to submit monthly reports to you, minister Motshekga, which should include reasons why schools cannot return to pre-Covid traditional attendance. These reports need a plan with the proposed dates for the return of all primary schools to a traditional model and detailed steps that will be taken to ensure that they are safe. There is no indication whether MECs have submitted these reports. There is also no indication of support being put in place to ensure that all primary schools can return to full capacity. An additional worry is whether the continuation of rotational schooling has simply been rubber-stamped. In July last year, the ministerial advisory committee (MAC) advised that the harm done to learners attending school on a rotational basis – specifically the cognitive, nutritional, and psychological costs – exceeds the benefits of reduced Covid infections from smaller class sizes. Despite the MAC’s advice, it is alarming that schools are set to continue with rotational timetabling in 2022. Preliminary research findings from an evaluation of early-grad reading and mathematics interventions by Nic Spaull, associate professor of economics at Stellenbosch University and the principal investigator of Nids-Cram, show that just 14% of learners attended school daily in term three of last year in the Western Cape. Alarmingly, 869 out of 1,010 primary schools in the province have been approved for continued rotational attendance this year because of their limited capacity to adhere to all health and safety regulations – notably the one-metre physical distancing rule. This means only 14% of schools in the province will be operating at full capacity. In Limpopo, only 10% of learners attended school every day in terms one and two of last year, and only 48% of children in no-fee schools attended every day in term three. Anecdotal reports suggest that as many as 70% of schools in some provinces have applied to remain on rotational attendance this year. This is highly problematic. Coupled with increased cases of learner pregnancy and dropout rates, the continued use of rotational attendance erodes learners’ right to quality basic education. Since the one-metre distancing requirement at primary schools was imposed, the country has moved from Covid alert level 3 to alert level 1. The vaccine is readily available to all adults and children from 12. All teachers have been given the opportunity to be vaccinated, and according to the DBE, uptake has been positive. Therefore, taking into account all the steps taken to mitigate against rising infections, we urge the department of co-operative governance & traditional affairs to do away with physical distancing requirements in schools. If the country experiences other Covid waves, as we have seen with the Omicron variant, the DBE must use the risk-adjusted strategy as promised, allowing for context-specific responses. In addition, through the National Coronavirus Command Council and MAC, the government must develop a long-term plan that outlines the education sector’s response to new variants and increases in infections. Honourable ministers, it has been more than 18 months since the onset of the pandemic, and while the science has changed, the response to schools has remained the same. We can not continue to allow our children to suffer by having inflexible and detrimental approaches in response to Covid. We implore you to work co-operatively and act swiftly to protect the best interests of our children and their right to education. With every day lost, we move closer to creating a lost generation.  